What does culture mean in investment
banking?
>> I think it's probably fair to say every
firm aspires to the same culture, right?
You you aspire to be driven by
excellence and attention to detail and
client service and uh and and you
produce that great uh coverage through
teamwork and training and and
mentorship. I mean, every everyone
aspires to all that. There there there
are though different cultures. There are
some places I think are much harder to
work than others. Although I think the
industry has become a little more in
common. I mean I think there was there
was a day when you know the difference
in culture between like a Morgan Stanley
and a Bear Sterns was was vast I would
say.
>> Say more about that. Like what would
have been the difference?
>> Um you know there there were some firms
that sort of you know the word scrappy
sometimes gets thrown around on Wall
Street right and if you're if if you're
the elite firm like say you know back in
the day Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs
were of course they're still elite firms
in many ways today. Uh but you know, as
opposed to someone who's kind of scrappy
trying to get business that maybe you
wouldn't do.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, how good uh at Excel are you?
>> Um not good compared to a lot of people
who listen to this podcast, I would
imagine. Right. I mean, I can do some
basic stuff like auto sum and you know,
so some for No, it's not. That's like
literally clicking a button. I can write
like a couple formulas in the little
command prompt, but I think everyone
everyone can do.
>> I can write some really rudimentary
formulas, but I never really like got
good at it to the degree that some
people are. But the good news is I saw
that
>> we don't have to learn it.
>> We don't have to learn it. I saw that um
Claude uh code they have or Claude they
have some extension where you just talk
to Excel in English and you say like you
know build this kind of formula and make
these changes and import this. I haven't
played around with it so I'm not 100%
sure it would work and to be honest
because of my limited Excel skills I
wouldn't even be able to verify if it
worked in the first place but my sense
is you know that maybe uh that seems
like uh maybe that's changing. I would
guess that it works pretty well. And
imagine if you're someone who's been
working probably in finance for like 20
years and you became known as
>> not and I don't want to say Excel
spreadsheet monkey,
>> Excel spreadsheet gorilla like you know
someone really admired for their Excel
skills and suddenly you've been
disrupted.
>> Totally. Well, sometimes you see these
things online where like they show this
stuff like, "Oh, the investment bank uh
investment analysts or junior analysts
just got put out of a job and like
there's got I'm pretty sure there's more
to the job." So, I do know that like
building models and so forth is an
important thing in finance and Wall
Street uh in various capacities. I'm
pretty sure that's not the entire job.
I'm pretty sure automating Excel is only
part of it. But, nonetheless, technical
skills are technical skills. And if that
changes, who knows? Maybe the job could
change. Well, the question I've always
had about Wall Street is how much of it
is driven by your own personality and
sort of clientf facing skills versus I
am a brilliant analysis who is not only
able to come up with amazing ideas for
mergers and acquisition sort of, you
know, working girls style where like Mel
Melanie Griffith is in a elevator and is
like, I know what your company needs to
needs to merge with whatever versus like
I'm just really good at hobnobbing with
executives.
>> It's probably a mix, right? That would
be my guess that there's someone is
really good at, oh, this company that
owns parking lots and this uh the city
could buy another parking lot company
and so forth and then another person
who's really good at staying out and
taking the clients to a nice dinner. I
don't but I I I I really don't know. And
anyway, I don't think you can really or
I don't really want to have a
conversation about the degree to which
AI is going to disrupt all of these
white collar jobs until I have a better
hand on what the white collar jobs are
in the first place. I feel like we
should
>> how important are Excel skills actually
in this business?
>> What is the sort of distribution of
skills that it takes to thrive in some
of these capacities? Anyway, very
excited to say uh we really do have the
perfect guest to talk about uh some of
this. someone we talked to last year and
that was about sort of the history of
investment banking over the last several
decades and the sort of connection
between global capitalism and investment
banking. We wanted to have him back on
the show because as an investment
banking veteran, someone who can maybe
talk about the inside and how how people
work and how the culture change and how
technology changes. So, we're going to
be speaking with return guest Scott
Bach. He is the former longtime CEO of
the investment bank Greenh Hill, the
author of the recent book Surviving Wall
Street and uh comes back on Nodlot. So
Scott, thank you so much for coming back
with us.
>> It's great to be back. Thank you.
>> For listeners who in case they didn't
listen to the previous one, which they
should, uh when did your career span on
Wall Street? When did you first get into
it? And you know how what give us the
sort of the 30 secondond Scott Bach
career bio? Well, I I feel like I
started at the very beginning of really
the explosion of the investment banking
business. You know, as I said in my
book, when I graduated from Wharton, I
did not know what an investment banker
was. I knew exactly one person from our
entire class who got a job on Wall
Street. So, it was a very small place
back then. M&A was, you know, very rare.
>> What year are we talking about?
>> 1981. You know, it's the year interest
rates peaked. It's the, you know, stock
market was had been flat for more than a
decade. uh you know, private equity as a
phrase didn't even exist. Hedge fund
didn't exist. I mean, it was a very very
different world. By the way, it wasn't
even legal to buy back your own stock
back then. That that happened a year
later. Uh it was viewed as market
manipulation to do that. So, the whole
thing of sort of playing with balance
sheets, putting companies together and
so on. I mean, there had been a bit of
that in the 1960s, mostly around
building conglomerates, which I think in
part was because they couldn't buy back
stock because if you're generating cash,
what are you going to do with it? You
could be ITT, a big industrial company,
and say, "Well, I think I'll buy the
Hartford, a big insurance company." You
know, today people would think that's a
crazy idea, but that was kind of the
predecessor to what became, you know,
the M&A and transaction uh business
around, you know, maximizing shareholder
value. That that really began, I would
say, right at the beginning of my
career.
>> Perfect.
>> This is already a fascinating
conversation, I have to say.
>> Questions. So I imagine this dynamic
would have changed throughout your
career, but how much of the investment
banking business is the bankers
approaching clients and saying we have
an idea for you versus the clients
coming to the bankers and saying we have
a problem such as we have all this cash
and we can't you know buy back our
shares or we want to do something with
it to reduce our cost of capital or
whatever. you know, that changed an
awful lot over time because at the
beginning there were lots of companies
and very few investment bankers and so
they so they didn't get a visit all that
often. Uh and so when they did the
banker would try to bring you know ideas
that maybe they hadn't heard before. You
know now there's thousands and thousands
of investment bankers u many many
different firms of many different types
and they're all maintaining
relationships. So, it really turns into
more of a dialogue where where you don't
you don't just, you know, you never met
the client before. You just show up say,
"Hey, I think you should buy this
company down the street." And, "Wow,
that's a great idea. I hadn't heard that
before." And and they do it. It's more
like you have an ongoing dialogue with a
client. You figure out what they want to
do, what their, you know, kind of what
their appetite of their board is, what
their balance sheets like, how their
business is going, how they feel about
their share price, you know, what what
they think is kind of the next big thing
for them. uh and over time you come to
an idea almost mutually I would say.
>> What were you good at in the early 80s
or the people that you went to work with
very early on. What would you say you
had in common? Why why did uh yeah why
was it a fit for you?
>> For me I was probably a little bit
different since I came from a legal
background than some I mean there were
some people who were you know the XL and
by the way XL wasn't even around then.
It was Lotus 123 uh uh who were you know
the XL jockeyies who built these you
know enormous models and so on. And I
did a bit of that uh myself. I think my
strength was more in sort of
structuring, conceptualizing,
negotiating, you know, marketing,
talking to CEOs and boards. It was more
of that kind of uh in many ways the
qualitative skills, uh the math, you can
pick up what you need fairly quickly.
And you know, as I sometimes tell, you
know, people of like my my son's
generation, he's he's 30 years old. I
tell his people at his pure love, I say,
you know, the great Rubicon to cross in
the world of, you know, Wall Street and
related fields is when you get to the
point where there's somebody smart
working for you, right?
>> You're you're you're no longer you're
you're no longer the one, you know,
training some complete newbie. You're no
longer the one doing it all yourself.
You're the one who's doing a bit of
conceptualizing and giving it to a very
smart person who's going to stay late at
night and build you a beautiful model.
>> I want to ask you what it was actually
like working as a sort of junior banker
in the 80s. But before I do, what's with
all the people with legal degrees going
into banking in the 1980s? Because you
weren't the only one. I think there were
a few other famous um compatriots at the
time, Lloyd Blankfine, for instance,
stands out. But what was it about having
done a law degree that translated into
banking back then?
>> There there were many who made the move.
And as a matter of fact, while I was
interviewing, the New York Times Sunday
magazine had a cover story called
Lawyers Becoming Bankers. I mean, it
really was a big phenomenon. And I think
literally the reason was the business
exploded. Suddenly there's just massive
amounts of transaction activity. There
aren't that many investment bankers.
You're not just going to hire more
people who are 22 years old and train
them. You need someone who's 26 or 28 or
30 years old who actually has kind of
been around the business. They may have
some skills to learn, but they bring
other skills to the table. And so they
brought in the bank the the lawyers
including myself as kind of a way of
sort of uh ramping up the this the scale
of the team rather than just saying
we're going to just hire more 22-y olds
and train them. But you didn't have the
time for that. You know there was so
much such a growth in transaction
activity. That's why a lot of lawyers
made that move.
>> Well you mentioned just now you're like
okay it's nice to be in the position
where you can conceptualize something
and then the really you know the smart
whiz kid stays up all night building the
model. Why are they staying up all
night? Like this is the this is sort of
one of the big questions that people
have is like what is it about the
business that demands these sort of in
some case extreme hours late into the
night? Why can't they just do it during
the day and like clock out at 5? Uh very
good question. You know, I think one and
this this kind of relates to you know
the future of AI and efficiency and
investment banking and so on as well. I
I think maybe the dirty little secret of
the industry in terms of how the sausage
is actually made is that the actual
building of the model, the creation of
the math that says why it makes sense or
doesn't make sense to buy something at a
certain share price that that that takes
a limited amount of time. uh the the
fiddling with the PowerPoint pages that
express that information. So it's makes
just the right points in just the right
way and just just the right color scheme
and you know just the right things in
italics and other things in bold and
things like that. You know, bankers tend
to be perfectionists, okay? And so they
will fiddle with that for a very long
time. And a lot of times, I mean, if you
ask people who are in the early part of
their careers, like what are you really
doing when you're there late at night,
it's very often it's fine-tuning uh math
that was done long ago.
>> There's also a schedule um misalignment,
I guess, because you get the feedback
from your boss at like 5 or 6 p.m.,
right? and like at the end of their day
and then you have to stay up really late
to make all the changes and get them on
their desk in the morning. But okay,
perfectionism, long hours. Was that the
case when you were initially entering
the industry in the '8s?
>> Very much so. It
>> but not with PowerPoint with something
else.
>> Well, it that's true. I mean, it
literally was uh I don't know was I'm
not sure it was called anything. I think
it was like a typed page, you know, of
numbers, you know. It was kind of the
early the early version where there
wasn't all the software that put it in
in pretty pictures and so you know look
that that came along with the you know
pie charts and bar charts and things
like that you know fairly early but it
wasn't nearly as kind of uh beautiful as
it and I mean now it almost looks like
you know what what Vanity Fair magazine
used to look like right you open it's
got beautiful color and pictures and
charts and uh and and all that sort of
thing but people always worked very long
hours that that that was always the the
uh the sort of ethos of the industry
that that uh there's a lot of work to be
done. We want it to be perfect and hey,
if you can make it a little bit better
by staying another half hour, you stay
another half hour. So how much of that
do you think was driven by genuine
client demand in the sense that you know
a client presumably would be not very
impressed if he saw that a bullet point
was slightly misaligned in a PowerPoint
presentation or something like that
versus driven by the institution itself
and a sort I I don't want to say hazing
culture but there is a sense that you
know we all have to work long hours. I
worked long hours at the beginning of my
career. It's expected that now you are
going to work long hours yourself. I
think if you go back to the beginning,
really the 1980s, I think it grew
initially out of neither of those
things. I think it grew out of the fact
the business was growing so fast and and
you had a limited size team and you had
twice as many deals to work on as last
year and next year you had 50% more than
that and I mean it was a really
extraordinary growth and so there just
like weren't enough hands on deck that
you could you know go home at 7:00 at
night. Now over time that generation of
bankers including myself you know they
they bore the scars of those years
throughout their careers and so yes they
there probably was in the industry some
element of hey I worked like this you're
going to work like this uh but initially
it was just a genuine business uh uh
issue of hey there's so much business to
do so few of us here to do it we have to
work very late to get it done. What
about the element of essentially banking
like many other fields including
academia but also law you know there's
like a pyramid element where there's
like a very small number or relatively
small number of extraordinarily good
remunerative jobs at the top at a large
base of you know junior analysts and so
forth and how much is it a sort of
emergent competition amongst the junior
bankers or whatever such that it's not
even necessarily some directive to put
in crazy hours, but there's a big field
of people and they want to get up to the
next rung and there's fewer spot to the
next rung and that for that creates that
mechanism of intense competition that
the desire to sort of overleas you know
to to just go over the top and yeah that
that's that certainly is there as well.
I remember back I don't know why I
remember this but back you know kind of
in the late 80s uh I was probably late
20s at that time not even a vice
president yet at Morgan Stanley I
remember we had this meeting once with
the head of investment banking at Morgan
Stanley guy named Joe Fog very very sort
of very sort of tough guy of that of
that era and and we're sitting around
the table I don't know there must have
been I don't know 20ome associates in
New York at that time something like
that and people are asking the question
hey you know we have someone you know
who covers the retail industry someone
who covers the industrial someone who
covers, you know, insurance companies,
like what what what are we going to grow
up into? You know, what what are the
roles going to be for us? And so, people
did try very hard to differentiate
themselves. Now, of course, what none of
us around that table knew is this
business was going to be like a hundred
times bigger.
>> So, so it wasn't like, oh, we have
somebody to cover the retail industry,
so I guess that's not an opportunity for
me. No, there was going to come a day
when you'd have 25 people covering the
the uh retail industry. But there's
always been that sense of, you know, few
opportunities at the top. even when it
wasn't true, you know, even when there
there was going to be more opportunity.
>> So, I imagine quite a bit of the work
you were doing in the 1980s is what we
would now characterize as pretty wrote
work in the sense that, you know, we we
didn't have computers. We didn't have
Bloomberg terminals that would show the
share price or or a bond quote. You
would have to like actually call someone
up and get that information.
>> Quotron, which I know who owned that
company, but Bloomberg put it out of
business a long time ago.
>> Um, shout out to the Bloomberg terminal.
I guess, but you know, you went through
a wave of disruption basically. And yet
it seems that the work of physically
going somewhere to find corporate papers
or physically calling someone up to get
a share price quote that was replaced
with work of a different kind. Can you
explain how that substitution kind of
happened?
I think it was replaced with going from
the the sort of very intermittent
meetings with a limited number of
clients to talk about ideas to a place
uh the industry is today where you go
very very regularly to almost every
company on the planet of any real size.
Right? you're someone is there and
you're there with analysis of their
industry, their performance, their stock
price, their competitors, uh what's for
sale, what might be for sale and and so
it's more like a saturation coverage.
It's you know, it's a little bit I think
investment making is very very different
from consulting but you know but where
where it has some similarity is this
kind of try this attempt and desire to
sort of almost get inside the business
and really know your client's business.
And that was not something that was even
attempted back in the 1980s. But that
that's what all those people are doing
with all those extra hours now.
>> Why did the big you know you mentioned
you in the early 80s you couldn't have
anticipated that the industry was going
to grow 100fold or whatever it was. And
this is one of those things where
perhaps many and the people many in the
public like why is finance so big? Why
why is there so much money in this area?
Finance doesn't produce anything. Why
why is this why has this grown so much?
How would you articulate that to someone
why fundamentally there is just so much
demand for financial services at the
corporate level and so much more than
there was say 40 years ago or 45 years
ago? Look, I I think there they're lit.
It's no exaggeration to say that there
really was a an epical change. Uh that
the the world of sort of post World War
II, you know, big companies building
conglomerates, uh you know, work at the
same place for 35 years like my father
did. And uh you know, not a massive
amount of intense competition, not a lot
of mergers, kind of stable stable, uh
companies. and and and and you know,
maybe that meant slow growth at some
point and maybe that was part of a
problem. Uh but in the early 80s, you
had really a lot of things change. I
think corporate culture changed a lot.
You know, Jack Welch took over from a
guy named Regg Jones, who was very
involved at Penn, where I I went uh you
know, a very very different kind of
character. Um you know the uh the the
tax law changed. You know capital gains
got started getting taxed differently
from ordinary income. The tax rates got
quite uh cut quite a lot. Uh
deregulation increase the uh kind of
pressure on unions. You know Reagan
breaking the air traffic controllers uh
union uh the ability to buy back stock.
Uh even even the sort of theoretical uh
notion of you know what is a company for
right? Milton Friedman said the
company's sole purpose is to make money.
You know, a professor at Harvard
Business School named Michael Jensen
wrote all these these stories or
analysis about why, you know, you had to
maximize shareholder value and you can't
serve two masters. So, that has to be
the only thing you're you're trying to
do. And, you know, and he had this
longunning debate with my first boss,
Marty Lipton, founder of Wtel Lipton,
about, you know, should a company serve,
you know, the community, its employees,
its customers, etc. and and that all
those things mixed together really made
for uh a tremendous focus on
transactions. How do you maximize value?
Is it with more shares outstanding or
less outstanding? Is it combining with
this other company? Is it spinning off a
business you've already got? Uh maybe
this year it's spinning it off, maybe
four years later it's buying it back.
You know, this this game really in a
way. Uh and hedge funds grew up to sort
of play that game, to bet on that game.
and investment bankers grew up to really
you know drive uh the transaction
activity from that. So the industry that
you know again was very very small back
in the in the 70s and uh you know as you
turned in into that sort of Reagan era
when all those rules changed just really
exploded and you know the number of
transactions to you know has been very
very high and growing for a long time. I
think the interesting question is does
that go on forever? Uh but it's not like
it was there forever. If you're if
you're, you know, the age I am and you
started when I did, you sort of feel
like it did, but if you look just a tiny
bit further back in history, you
realize, no, this is all new.
>> Um, this might be a dumb question, but
in terms of the urge to do something as
a corporate manager or executive, did
you notice a difference between public
and private companies? Was that urgency
or pressure um more apparent at publicly
traded ones?
Yes, because they had, you know, there
was this thing that became known as the
market for corporate control, right? If
if you if you don't buy into my mantra
of maximizing shareholder value and
therefore you don't, I will bid for your
company and I will maximize shareholder
value and the difference between the
value today and the value later is going
to be mine. Uh, and so there was
pressure on public companies. Uh, of
course, private companies, you know,
there there were a lot of sort of
family-owned companies that had a longer
term point of view and some that are
still there. you know, the Mars family,
uh, you know, some companies like that
are huge. Cargill, some really big ones
that have remained, you know, kind of
steadfastly private. But today, of
course, private company really means
private equity owned company, you know,
and that has grown, you know, what
30,000 plus uh companies owned by that
sector. A bit of a log jam right now,
but um uh and and they really are the
masters of that universe. They're the
masters of trying to maximize
shareholder value. Actually, we should
talk about that because this is the
other thing that's happened in
investment banking is you have had the
rise of private equity and also hedge
funds which are in some ways, you know,
competing directly um with bankers. One
of the things you sometimes hear
actually when it comes to the junior
bankers actually working really long
hours is this idea that well, we all
know they're going to go join Blackstone
in like two years anyway, so we have to
squeeze out as much as we can from them
uh before that actually happens. How did
that actually change the business? And I
guess like how much pressure did that
generate on the banks to respond and and
uh I I guess retool their own offerings
in response.
>> Well, private equity really became the
biggest client base for the whole
industry, right? And that also was a
very very small naent industry. You go
back to the you know the early days like
Morgan Stanley had its first private
equity fund. It was I can't remember
exactly I think it was like a 440
million fund. You know you go back to
KKR's initial fund. I mean, people used
to do leverage buyouts with like, you
know, buy a $10 million company with a
$100,000 down and buy and and buy buy
the rest with with debt.
>> We could do that. I feel like we could
put 100k together. Yeah,
>> I think you may have missed the
opportunity. Unfortunately, prices went
up from there, but you know, these
things kind of fed on themselves, had
some early success and so really in the
1980s beginning then you had the rise of
the private equity industry. you know,
these huge players that for a long time,
you know, did very very well taking
companies private, you know, kind of
doing a number of things to boost their
returns and then putting them back out
in into the public. That that has also
changed quite a lot where the industry
is looking into, you know, all kinds of
private capital, right? I mean, you
know, Blackstone really pioneered this
model of, oh, let's do real estate,
let's do hedge funds, let's do private
credit. Uh and so you you expanded to so
many different fields, but that that
really fundamentally changed Wall Street
because the rise of the private equity
industry created a client that was kind
of in the kind of permanently in the
transaction business, right? Not like a
public fortune 100 or 500 company that
might do a deal every year or two or
three. You know, these were firms that
did, you know, 10 or 20 deals a year.
And so they were became the most
important clients. their their raising
debt is is uh raising raising money, I
guess. That's a good one. Thank you. I
stole I stole that from uh Lloyd Fling
actually, but I feel bad. I've been
reading his book, which is why I keep
mentioning him.
>> That's a good one. Um so, what Okay, you
get a little bit further into your
career and you be get a sort of role
where perhaps you get to think little
big picture and you have to the more
junior people are the ones staying up
late, etc. talk to us a little bit about
recruiting and I this is an area of
course today that there's probably a lot
of anxiety for people going into the biz
but um talk to us a little bit about
like okay some things obviously can be
taught math can probably generally be
taught aligning bullet points on a uh
PowerPoint I think that could probably
be taught though fidiousness and
attention to detail maybe inherently
maybe not. How would you talk to us a
little bit about how you uh how you
found people at the right fit? how you
uh what that process was like.
>> Well, that also of course has changed
dramatically as the industry has grown.
If you go back to the early days, we
recruited at very few schools. I mean,
it really was sort of the Ivy League and
maybe a few others. Uh and it was for a
small number of jobs. So, there were
plenty of students there for that. Now,
when the industry really exploded, they
those schools weren't producing enough
people. And I can say in the early days
of Greenh Hill, we had in terms of like
what knowledge these these young people
had, we had a little bit of a a strategy
of, you know, let's take half of the
class be just just kids who are really
smart. You know, they can do math, they
can speak, they can write, they're they
just got great grades all the way
through. They're really really smart.
And and let's take the other half as
people who actually have some
substantive knowledge that's useful. You
know, they went to Wharton. There are
other great business schools as well.
University of Virginia had one. We
recruited a lot from University of
Texas, Indiana University, University of
Michigan. And so we'd kind of do half
and half and figure, you know, the kid
who majored in finance at Wharton can
teach the kid who majored in English at
at Yale. Now, today, what's changed is
that the typical student wherever he or
she uh sits as they're in their senior
year of college, I mean, they've had
like four internships by now. They've
taken various online courses. they come
in so ready to roll even if they majored
in something that's completely unrelated
uh to what Wall Street actually does. So
you're getting you're getting someone
who's almost trained before they even
arrive. Now you give them a lot more
training of course, but it's not the
kind of thing where you bring in an
English major, you know, as we did in
the early days and teach them like here
here's what a stock is and here's what a
bond is. You know, the these students
have been working on that since they
were in high school. I'm maybe I'm sorry
to say I think they should probably be
doing other things in high school. But
you know it's become it's become a very
very competitive world right even though
there's many many more opportunities for
uh students to get a job on Wall Street
today as they come out of college at the
same time it's very very competitive.
Was there like a point where you started
noticing that or like around when that
changed because it certainly tracks that
you like meet young people there like oh
my god like how do they know all this
stuff and about things that maybe it's
the internet or something the things
that I certainly didn't know about when
I was in high school really even college
in many instances but I'm curious when
you started when you started noticing
that I I think maybe in the sort of the
post do bubble bursting kind of in the
early 2000s when business really started
to pick up again and you had those
several great years leading into what of
course became the financial crisis. But
there was such an increase in uh
opportunity then and there was and and
now everyone was in on the secret,
right? I mean they could read about the
industry. They could understand the you
know compensation structures and the
potential for for themselves to to get
ahead in life and and so these students
started kind of working backwards like
okay I want to get a first year analyst
job. How do I do that? Okay what what
internship should I get after you know
freshman year? Well, you can't get a
very good one then, but maybe you can
get something tangentially. You know,
does your do you know somebody works as
a stock broker? Can you be a, you know,
work in the mail room there or
something? Well, after sophomore year,
maybe you can do a little better than
that. After junior year, maybe you can
get, you know, something better than
that. And by the time you show up, you
know, as a college junior looking for
that first year analyst job at Goldman
Sachs, you know, you've got like five
names on your resume that look like,
wow, this this person's been around the
industry a long time, even though
they're 21 years old at the at that
point. scary. Um, do you think as many
people are going to want to go in
finance given that I mean we've already
been through shifts in the popularity of
finance as a career? So, at one point it
was the place that you wanted to go to
if you were like a Harvard grad or
whatever and then it became tech for a
little while and um and now there's all
this anxiety over AI disrupting
particularly analytical jobs. Do you
think it's going to be as popular a
choice?
I think it will uh it will evolve and
fluctuate and and probably decline over
time just you know nothing I mean the
industry is all about cycles right
markets are all about cycles I mean
we've had a incredible run incredible
run okay the you know co was a little
bit of a hiccup right where markets sort
of plummeted and things slowed down but
then you know it it exploded in activity
in in just a matter of months later so
it's been a long run really since the
financial crisis of you know really
wonderful times uh largely on Wall
Street and you know at some point
there's going to be you know a
retrenchment from that there's going to
be some kind of decline who you know who
knows maybe maybe a war you know turns
things around maybe a private credit
problem turns things around but
something will happen I think and sort
of dampen the interest uh again just as
happened you know with the dotcom crash
or the financial crisis
>> let's talk a little bit more about
technology and the technological changes
that you saw in your career So okay
mention like you're using Lotus 123 in
the beginning which I I I have some
memory of Lotus 123 and but um and then
you know you're talking about the ease
of data retrieval is so much uh is so
much different now but talk to us about
okay 2024 what recent years and some of
the other ways like what what other
technological innovations came out and
what pro what uh what time consuming
activities did they shrink to near zero
and and what new things did people do on
top once okay the technology is here you
don't have to allocate your time to this
you're now going to allocate your time
to that talk to us what else you saw
there
>> sure yeah I mean look in the early days
like even a companies weren't even that
aware of their own share price right I
mean not everybody had a a Bloomberg
terminal or CNBC you know screen on
their on their desk if you're sitting in
Dayton Ohio uh so you didn't know um as
bankers you know you could bring very
little information and it was new to the
client it was interesting to the client
You know over time we used to do uh a
lot of laborious work to create sort of
a comparable companies analysis. Here
are the 10 companies in your business
segment. You know you trade at this PE
multiple or this EBIT DAO multiple and
here's where the other guys trade and
here's how their le leverage is
different than yours and here's how
their stock has performed. I mean that
used to be a tremendous amount of work.
you know now really a machine can
largely do that and and a lot of the
other uh kind of creation of sort of
standard charts on you know on what's
going on in the industry even what's
going on in your company can be done
very very quickly so I think you know
the pyramid I have to think is going to
get less fat at the bottom because
you're going to be really leveraging
technology to do a lot of things that
used to be somebody sitting up all night
up all night trying to find out you know
what PE multiple Coca-Cola was trading
at and how you know it's you can get it
at the touch of a finger.
>> Does the edge in that scenario, you
know, if if it's not about how much
knowledge you're accumulating and can
share with your client, is the edge more
on the execution side of things, just
the the knowledge or the client's belief
that you out of everyone else in the IB
business is going to be able to execute
like a smooth deal. I think that's true
to some degree and you know particularly
among sort of the so-called independent
firms like Greenh Hill was for a long
time and and many others are today but I
think among the larger you know group of
competitors I think a lot it's going to
come down to what else is in the
relationship you know are you are are
you in their revolving credit facility
did you do their bond offering are you
doing equity research for them uh are
you know are are you touching them and
just every are you doing their hedging
are you you know talking to them about
currency talking to them about commodity
prices. And so I do think it it may
that's why I think sort of the one-stop
shopping is kind of a little more
appealing again because if if nobody if
nobody really has the magic anymore,
right? The magic is now your fingertips.
>> Uh and you know even a lot of things
like you you can you can you don't even
need to do the Excel model. I mean you
you can say into a you know in the AI if
if you have this stream of cash flows
for this period of time at this discount
rate what's the number? I mean it will
give it to you without you typing a
single number on the page.
>> Um but I I think that with everyone
having access equal access to that
information. I think it will come down
to yeah maybe are you smarter than the
other guys? Can you execute better? But
probably in most cases you know what
else are you doing for me? And hey I
could give this to anyone but I'm going
to give it to you. How much, and Tracy
alluded to this at the very beginning,
but you know, how much of the job is
being a good hang, being a good hang at
the golf course, knowing being able to
get a good dinner reservation? It's
seriously, no, for real. This is like I
don't, you know, this is where I when I
think about if I were in this, I don't
think I'd be very good at that. I like
start looking at my watch or yawning or
start most likely start looking at my
phone and start looking bored, etc. The
the endurance to
>> This is true. It's very obvious when Joe
is bored talking to you. I speak from
experience.
>> So, this is not this would not be my
field. But talk to us about that element
and just the sort of
>> people skills and they're at now. Of
course, that's at quite the high level,
right? It doesn't matter how, you know,
how fun you are to be with as a as a
senior associate at at JP Morgan. Uh
that's not necessarily going to win the
business. But maybe your boss's boss,
you know, whether he's in the right golf
clubs and inviting clients and get, you
know, getting to know them on a personal
level. Look, there there's always going
to be that element uh to the business,
but that that's a pretty small piece.
And of course, everyone has that, too,
right? I mean, you can one up others.
You can bring somebody to the Masters,
you can, you know, rather than to, you
know, a country club in Long Island, you
know, you can uh there there's there's
different levels of sort of client
entertainment, but you know, that that
look, it's important to build
relationships. It always is. I think
what you know whether you're talking
about sort of personal wealth management
or corporate financial management what
the what the adviserss have to realize
is like everyone in the world is calling
on this guy and trying to get you know
either his personal money to manage or
trying to ma manage his corporate
affairs and help him do acquisitions and
so on. I mean it's not that's another
thing really that changed a lot in the
industry. used to be that people, you
know, firms had clients like like no,
that's my client and this one is your
client.
>> Now everyone
>> now they're just all clients and and
>> everyone's clients of everyone
>> and right and it's a kind of a
freeforall where you've got a lot of
parties out there, you know, and in you
being special because you invite
somebody to, you know, something and get
to know them better. I mean, everyone
else is doing that, too. And as a matter
of fact, if you don't have the
relationship, you're probably more prone
to do that because you're trying to
break in, you know, get get to know
them. Mhm. Um you mentioned this word
earlier in the conversation, but can you
explain culture to us? Explain all
culture to us. No, the investment
banking culture because this is one
thing that we hear all the time from,
you know, especially executives, former
executives at investment banks. This
idea that well we have a culture that is
different to someone else's culture. And
whenever you hear them summarize the
culture, it's almost always like, well,
we're client-f facing and it's all I've
never heard a bank say, it's not about
the client. Actually, our culture is
about something else. What does culture
mean in investment banking?
>> I think it's probably fair to say every
firm aspires to the same culture, right?
you you aspire to be driven by
excellence and attention to detail and
client service and uh and and you
produce that great uh coverage through
teamwork and training and and
mentorship. I mean every everyone
aspires to all that. There there there
are though different cultures. There are
some places I think are much harder to
work than others. Although I think the
industry has become a little more in
common. I mean I think there was there
was a day when you know the difference
in culture between like a Morgan Stanley
and a Bear Sterns was was vast I would
say.
>> Say more about that like what would have
been the difference?
>> Um you know there there were some firms
that sort of you know the word scrappy
sometimes gets thrown around on Wall
Street right and if you're if if you're
the elite firm like say you know back in
the day Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs
were of course they're still elite firms
in many ways today. Uh but you know as
opposed to someone who's kind of scrappy
trying to get business that maybe you
wouldn't do. I mean there there were
there was a day one of the interesting
things not to bring up the Epstein files
but uh but you know there was a day when
when there firms had a lot of rigor over
who they would do business with
>> you know and and I I know that you know
Morgan Stanley that was the case I think
at Goldman Sachs that was the case I
mean look in the law firm business there
were there were firms that didn't like
hostile takeovers you know they thought
that oh that that's kind of unseammly
for us to be trying to buy somebody
else's business on a hostile basis and
so these firms that you know you could
put in the category of scrappy were the
ones that were trying to be a little
more like hey if the client wants that
help I'm going to give the client that
help or if the client has a little bit
of a dollar
>> that's right and and and well and also
>> by you know maybe doing a transaction
for someone that's a client that maybe a
you know back in the day a Morgan
Stanley or Goldman Sachs wouldn't have
worked for now you've got a credential
in that industry now now you've done a
media deal now maybe you can do the next
media deal maybe you can swim upstream
toward the more prestigious client
science. So, so I think at one point the
cultures were a lot more different than
they are today. I think it's kind of
flattened. I I think you know it it look
this is probably a a function of of
scale of activity and and of things like
technology and of things like you know
just so much open information on
everything. You know, everyone can sort
of copy everyone else, right? It's
pretty obvious what a good good culture
is. I mean, treat, you know, get hire
smart young people, train them well,
treat them decently, uh, and and they'll
grow up to be, you know, good good
bankers, you know, pay attention to your
clients, uh, have integrity, uh, you
know, etc. You you'll you'll build a a
good business, but that those aren't
secrets, right? Everybody knows those. I
>> have a question. It's sort of this on
long-standing puzzle within finance. It
might be relevant this year because
there are some very big companies that
might come public. Um, why does the IPO
process as we know it exist and persist?
Because this is one of the long-standing
academic things is why is there
frequently a pop? Why did the companies
have to pay large fees to underwriters
particularly given you'd think the
internet could just just have an
auction, right, and auction out the
allocation of shares you want and then
get the market price instantly and so
forth. And yet, this has been tried for
a very long time. And going back to
the.com era, there have been attempts to
disintermediate the traditional IPO
process with almost no success. Spaxs
tried that seems to be sort of not a
particularly a counter signal perhaps.
How would you describe the persistence
of the IPO?
>> Well, you know, first of all, start with
public companies, right? That's what
what you have after you do an IPO. You
know, that market really has shrunk. I
mean, it fell in half. the number of
public companies in America fell in half
in the in the 25 years or so that that
our firm was an independent firm.
>> Um, so that I don't think that's a good
thing. I think that's I think it's a
good positive thing to have more
companies in the public realm where
there's more information and and more
under, you know, transparency to what
they do and so on. But I think to to go
from the world of private where nobody
really knows much about your company to
public I think having a a lot of you
know a lot of sort of activity around
that you know a big almost like PR
campaign you know lots
>> of it's like a corporate bar mitzvah
kind of and you like stand up there on
the thing and like Yeah. Yeah. Exactly.
>> It it is a bit like that. I mean, I
remember for our own IPO back in in
2004, we had like 60s something
one-on-one meetings as well as big group
meetings in places like New York and
Boston and so on. But if you're trying
to get known by a lot of investors in a
real hurry, you kind of need to go
through something like that. And you
know, and and it's not like the industry
has been some sort of a you know, uh uh
where the fees are fixed and there's
nothing you can do about it. But I mean
for a long long time an IPO was I
remember it was 7% that was an
underwriting commission you know over I
remember we worked uh and advised Visa
when it did what was then the biggest
IPO in 200 probably seven or something
like that uh and that was like a
fraction of a percent you know so so the
ind it is it it it
>> it sort of succumbs to competition right
and somebody says okay yeah if I'm if
I'm doing a classic early Silicon Valley
IPO and we're raising $100 million yes I
think a $7 million fee is fair for that
and probably your competitors feel that
way too. It's a lot of work. It's a
little bit risky. Uh but when you're
doing, you know, an IPO that's in the
hundreds of millions, the billions, and
maybe today the tens or hundreds of
billions, you know, the fees will be
very, very small and driven by pretty
ferocious competition, I'm sure.
>> Did you say Greenhill IPOed in 2004?
>> Yes. So that's kind of late, right, for
well certainly in the context of like
some of the larger investment banks
because I think by then even Goldman had
had gone from a partnership in
>> 1999.
>> Yeah. So what was the sort of pushpull
process of actually going public for
you? What were the considerations?
>> Well, for us it was that there had been
a long I mean obviously some bigger
firms like Morgan Stanley went public in
1986 and I think Goldman in 99 or
something like that. Um but you know for
a firm like ours that was kind of a
smaller more focused firm the long
history of that was that you normally
sold the firm and and even in its fairly
early days you'd kind of build something
you know prove you had a team prove you
had a brand prove you had some clients
and and you'd go out and sell the firm
there were many many cases that happened
uh and you know we viewed the IPO as an
alternative an IPO as a way to to to
realize the value you had created but
also keep the the what you thought was
the special culture to go back to that
uh you didn't want to change things, you
didn't want to give up control, etc. And
so that that was really what drove us to
go public and I think many others as
well.
>> So when but also in an IPO process,
you're raising capital, right? What what
does capital actually mean for a b a
boutique advisory firm like Greenhill,
>> you know, you're you're often it's that
used to be the case. That was the
original idea that you go public to
raise capital and to some extent that's
still true. But you look at even take
these mega you know technology companies
say do they do they need capital they
can raise all the capital they want in
the private markets. So it really has
evolved from that to wanting liquidity I
would say you want to have a you want to
have a marker that says here's what my
company is worth uh and you want to have
the liquidity to be able to transact at
that price on any given day. So I think
that has driven more IPOs in recent
years than the the kind of the earlier
notion of wow we need to build a new
factory or we need to you know invest a
lot to build an overseas business or
launch a new brand so we need to do an
IPO to raise money.
>> Has something changed on the IPO front?
No. And just maybe I missed it, but I
feel like several years ago, maybe in
the mid2010s, I still used to hear read
a lot of stories about so- and so won
the Uber deal, right? Or so and so and
this would be a big thing and they're
like they're flush left on the S1 or the
Perspectus,
>> Morgan Stanley getting Facebook or
something.
>> Yeah. Stuff like that. You used to and
now I feel like I don't see the like
there is that has something changed
there or
>> No, that's still a thing. Okay, that's
still that's still a thing. you still
want to be on the left and but but you
know what but also again the industry
became very very big very very
competitive and so you know it used to
be like there was one lead underwriter
and then you got into well you're the
the global lead you're the co- global
lead you're the lead left
>> massive lead in everyone title everyone
gets to be a lead right
>> it's uh it's like getting an A at
Harvard I understand they
>> participation trophers for trophies for
investment
>> bankers the Uber one like the wasn't
there there was a banker who became an
Uber Uber driver for a while. Yes, there
was. Yes, there was. Remember that? Cuz
he wanted to show that he and like I get
it. It's like that's cool. He like
really like got it. He really took the
job seriously and he drove for Uber and
stuff like that. But still in my mind I
was like
>> does this really make a difference from
Uber as they're just selling some shares
then they're moving on. Like I mean it's
cute.
>> People used to do that sort of thing. Uh
I think by the way I can't remember his
his name. He was kind of slightly after
my time, I think, but he is that banker
is still at Morgan Stanley and is uh I'm
sure going to be the one driving the
pursuit of Elon Musk's large IPOs to
come.
>> Um we should
>> Michael Grimes. That's who it is.
Michael. Yeah, he became he was also he
became the Uber. He became an Uber
driver for a while. Yeah,
>> he was a he was a big deal at that time.
I remember
>> definitely in the mix today with some of
these big potential IPOs. We should
actually talk about league tables though
because I feel like this is sort of
perhaps an inordinate amount of um of
what an investment banker's life is
actually about. And back when I was
covering the banks, the league tables
were the things I probably got called up
about the most. You know, lots of banks
explaining to me why the league table
rankings were not in fact an accurate
reflection of their business. How much
do those actually matter?
I think whether you're frankly if you're
number one or number four or number
seven, you you know or number nine or 11
even, you you probably have a a pretty
equal chance at at pursuing something.
But look, the bankers do, you know, do
aggressively fight to try to be number
one in in some in something, right? And
but but again, with the with the
increase in just availability of
information and transparency, I mean, it
used to be that, you know, there was a
lot of gamesmanship around the league
tables. you know, you you'd say, "Well,
we're number one in in uh you know, in
in IPOs." And you'd look into the
footnotes and it would say, you know,
this includes all deals for, you know,
radio stations with a market cap more
than $250 million. And, you know, if
you're trying to pitch some media deal
or something and you'd always have some
way to slice and dice like US IPOs, UK
IPOs, this industry, this deal size. Uh
now it's kind of all out there and it's
uh you know there but there's there's 10
or a dozen firms that that are very very
competitive and uh the fact that one
ranks number one versus four is not a
big deal.
>> It's hilarious. Michael Grimes
>> he not only drove for Uber uh he
mastered the online game Farmville
before Facebook's IPO. They spent hours
playing that and hey if that paid off
for him, good for him. And now he is
back because it looks like he'll
probably be
>> so a lot of people master Farmville for
free with no expected.
>> He uh he turned it into something and I
guess it's likely to be involved or
perhaps positioning himself for a
potential role in the SpaceX IPO. Okay.
Uh uh final question for me, but I'm
just curious. So like, okay, we don't
know what the future is going to look
like, but I'm curious like people you're
talking to or things you're seeing the
AI question and there's some obvious
things today. Anyone knows that you can
do a very good comp analysis already
with with almost no knowledge like what
are some comps here and maybe that's not
the kind of output that you would show
to a client, but it might get you 95% of
the way there. And so that's that's
extraordinary. And we talked about uh uh
Excel files and stuff like that. What
else? like what does it feel like AI is
going to do to this space or what would
be your guess or where today would you
imagine we're already seeing AI change
the nature of the job
>> you know I think no one really knows the
answer to that question of course is
such a fastmoving technology but look I
do think it will change a lot about how
>> uh bankers interact with clients because
the the information now is going to go
from you know from kind of available but
you have to sort of work to dig it out
to available just literally at your
fingertips. And by the way, to not just
to you the banker, but also to your
client.
>> Yeah.
>> So, I think differentiating yourself uh
as a banker inside one of these firms or
as one of these firms relative to your
peers, trying to win the IPO, trying to
win the M&A deal, trying to win the bond
offering uh is going to be more
complicated. You you'll have you'll be
more efficient in preparing your
materials. You'll be more efficient in
communicating with that client and
delivering, you know, interesting,
insightful information to them. But a
lot of that information is going to look
it's going to be commodity-like.
>> Yeah.
>> And so the the real challenge is going
to be, you know, if a client has access
to all the information you do and
they're getting all the feeds of, you
know, various data they like and so on
and you have a one-hour meeting with
that client, how are you going to use
that meeting, that one hour meeting, you
know, they already know a lot as you're
walking in there. So how how do you use
that? It's got to be more about, you
know, the human dimension, the the
tactics, why this company may be more
amunable to a deal now than they were in
the past, you know, things like that
that are more about psychology really
than about math.
>> I feel like the trend is towards
extroverts with large balance sheets, I
suppose.
>> Scott Buck, thank you so much for coming
back on the podcast. We love catching up
with you and we got to do it again
sometime.
>> I would love to. It was great fun. Thank
you,
>> Tracy. I love talking to Scott. I think
>> it's great. I'm glad we I'm glad we met.
Uh Scott, I think the um just this idea
and it came up at the very end about um
the information asymmetry just being
gone. And it feels like you know that's
not something that is just true with AI
now, right? But it feels like there is a
version of this story that you could say
going back for the last 45 years in
which decline degradation of the
information edge that a bank would have
had over its clients for all kinds of
different largely you know technological
changes since then.
>> Yeah. I mean I found that conversation
fascinating. I guess the the two
takeaways for me are the the first
technological revolution in investment
banking and the idea that well we don't
have to spend as as many hours like
actually pulling physical SEC filings or
something like that or looking up quotes
on a quotron or or whatever.
>> And what replaced that work was more
meetings, right? I feel like humans can
always uh
>> find a reason to meet with each other.
Humans love meeting
>> I know. It's crazy, isn't it? That's
ridiculous. Humans just love touching
base. And anyway, am I maybe I'm
revealing my own uh
>> your own biases.
>> My own biases of how humans use their
>> I think it's very good that we have an
extrovert and an introvert on the show.
We get both s both sides of the story.
Um, but the other thing I was thinking
is the trend towards bigger balance
sheets, more services, the one-stop shop
idea, and and it feels to me like, okay,
if if you can't have anformational edge
anymore, and if you do have this sort of
flattening of culture for various
reasons because everyone's getting
smarter and smarter about what a good
culture actually looks like, um, and
they're able to sort of execute on it in
various ways, then it feels to me like
it's very much going to be fought just
on size and scale.
>> You know, I don't think uh share
buybacks are evil the way a lot of
people do, but it is interesting. We
could just go back and like I always
forget that that they haven't been
around that long and that they were seen
as market manipulation at one point. We
could just ban them. I mean, the fact
that
>> capitalism worked fine for a very long
time without share back share buybacks
would probably, you know, probably
wouldn't be the end of the world.
>> We should do another episode on this.
But that reminds me the other thing I
was thinking was this idea that like
well we had an entire I mean multiple
industries really that grew up whose
entire sense of purpose was about doing
transactions right so you have the
traditional Wall Street banks but then
you had private equity and private
credit and so you just have this
explosion in in deals. I wonder if
Michael Grimes is going to ride on a
rocket to get the uh to lock. He's gonna
he's going to do a little space joy ride
so to get that. But there was one thing.
Oh, you know what I thought was also
very interesting.
>> Um and I think this says a lot about
culture in general beyond just banking.
The idea that at one point for better or
worse and maybe for better there were
like uh clients that the banks wouldn't
touch that they and uh that they're like
no we we're above this. this is not what
we do here.
>> Well, some of them had investigators
like on staff to go out and investigate
potential clients.
>> I think that's really interesting and a
certain level of you know what, we're
going to leave some money off the table
because this is not what we do here. We
have standards and so forth. And I do
feel like these days it's just money.
It's just uh across the board it's just
accumulating more and more money. And so
the idea of some money isn't good enough
for here like it does not feel like
that's a thing anymore. Maybe well I
think a lot of people would uh say in
retrospect people they should have had
better standards about who they do
business with.
>> Yeah. It feels much more amoral now. And
I mean that in the sense that like
there's a possibility that people hide
behind that and say like well we
shouldn't be making qualitative
decisions about our clients. We're just
here to uh you know share the good
gospel of capitalism. All right. Shall
we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the
OddLotss podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Alaway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our
producers, Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman, Dash Bennett atbot, and
Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks.
>> And if you want more Odd Thoughts
content, you should check out our daily
newsletter. You can find that at
bloomberg.com/awthotss.
>> And you can chat about all these topics
247 with fellow listeners in our
Discord, discord.gg/ gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.